[AUDIO LOGO]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: This
conversation may be a bit
in your face if you're a strict
adherent to biblical texts.
Paul Wallis, an Anglican
pastor and former archdeacon,
is a biblical scholar
and has helped
translate a story as to who
were the gods in the Bible.
They do not resemble what
I learned in Sunday school.
And why does this matter?
Because the same influences
are interfering with
humankind to this day.
Is that fair to say, Paul?
>> PAUL WALLIS: Yes,
that's fair to say, Regina.
>> REGINA: And welcome.
You've come from Australia.
I've interviewed you on
my side a couple of times.
But we haven't had a chance
to sit face to face before.
So this is fabulous.
It's a real treat.
>> WALLIS: It's great to be
in the same room with you.
Thank you.
>> REGINA: So here we are,
the word hermeneutics--
hermeneutics.
You're a religious educator that
specializes in hermeneutics.
What is hermeneutics?
Because I just
think of hermetics.
But that's not what it is.
>> WALLIS: Hermeneutics
is a great word.
It's the principles
of interpretation.
And so one of my roles in my 33
years in church-based ministry
was training pastors.
And I trained them in the
history of Christian thought
and hermeneutics.
So we would find the tools to
work out what's in the text.
How can we get out
of the text what
the writer intended instead
of us reading things in?
And so we would look
at source analysis.
Where does this text come from?
Is it the original form?
If it isn't, how does it differ?
Why?
What does that mean?
Form analysis, what kind
of literature is it?
And then the
linguistic question,
what do the words mean?
So these were the tools
that I explored with pastors
over 15-year period.
And it was those
skills that got me
into the whole world
of paleocontact,
which we're going to get into.
>> REGINA: Yes, we are going to.
So first of all, let's begin--
we'll just start with all of
the names for God in the Bible.
Let's just start with
the names and how
they run parallel
to other texts,
such as Sumerian texts
and the Sky People,
because this
launches us right in.
>> WALLIS: Well, when we talk
about the Bible, people think,
oh, yes, that's
the book about God.
But if I were to
tell you that there
is no word in the Bible for a
transcendent creator spiritual
God, you might be surprised.
But there's no word
there that means that.
There are other words
that get translated as God
or the Lord or the Almighty.
>> REGINA: Or gods.
>> WALLIS: Or gods.
But in my work, I've
gone to those words
and asked, what do
they mean at root?
Because if you start reading
lexicons, they'll tell you,
oh, this translation
is uncertain,
or this translation is
probably inaccurate.
So we go to the roots.
And the oldest word in the
Bible used for God is "Elohim."
And the roots mean
the powerful ones.
And all of a sudden,
you'll realize
that's why there are plural
behaviors, plural verb forms.
That's why God says let us make.
Let us make the humans
to look like one of us.
One of whom?
One of the powerful ones.
So that's Elohim.
Then there are the Bene Elohim.
Literally, that means the
sons of the powerful ones.
But the way it's
used suggests it's
like the sons and daughters
of the American Revolution.
It means the ones like,
having the characteristics of.
So we've got the ones
like the powerful ones.
That's the second wave.
Then you've got El
Elyon, the highest.
It means the powerful
one more senior
than the other powerful ones.
That's El Elyon.
You notice God hasn't
cropped up yet.
El Shaddai gets translated
as the Almighty,
doesn't mean that.
If you go to really
authoritative lexicons
like Brown-Driver-Briggs,
you will
find that it will
tell you that Almighty
is an invented translation.
It could mean the powerful
one of the mountains.
one of the plains.
I argue in my book
"The Eden Conspiracy,"
it actually means the
powerful one, the destroyer.
So when he shows up,
introduces himself to Abraham,
his opening line is I'm the
powerful one, the destroyer.
Walk in front of me and
don't put a foot wrong.
And that's his
introduction to Abraham.
>> REGINA: Now, that's
where we still are today.
>> WALLIS: Yes.
>> REGINA: Isn't
that interesting?
So when the destroyer comes--
and please share with us some
of the names of the one who
is known as the destroyer.
>> WALLIS: Well, El Shaddai,
the significance of that is,
I think, in that moment
where he meets Abraham,
it sets up this expectation
because we think that's God.
We now think we live
in a universe where
we have to tip toe
around for fear
of offending the Almighty,
the invented translation
because he's going to punish us.
He's going to throw us into
hell and torment us forever
if we get it wrong.
I think it goes back to that
moment where we read that
as a God text, and it isn't.
And I think, as you're hinting,
the name of the destroyer
occurs all around the world.
You go to India,
talk about Shiva.
There are other names around the
world that mean the same thing.
And it's a recollection
of the same memory
in our cultural memory of times
when we were invaded, colonized
and overpowered by beings
that were not human.
And that didn't have
any empathy with us.
And that is a current through
the biblical narrative.
It's not the only kind
of contact we have,
because there are
other beings who
show up who are a lot nicer.
>> REGINA: We'll talk
about that as well.
The reason I love your work and
want to talk to you about this
is because, literally,
the world is still
divided into these
mindsets that we're
all given birth under
these same destroyer gods,
but pitting us
against each other
as though one person's
God is better than another
when we really all been raised
under the same influence
that we have to answer to that
is a master over our lives.
And I think most people
watching this by now
know that is not true.
>> WALLIS: No, that's not true.
And there's a very dramatic
moment in the Bible,
it comes in Deuteronomy
32 that tells you straight
away that the Elohim
have invaded our planet.
And they're now
carving up territory.
And El Elyon, the chief, is
giving this parcel of land
to this powerful one,
this parcel of land
to this powerful one.
And then the Yahweh
character gets a people group
with no land.
So he's in a foul
mood from that point
on because he's going to have
to wrestle some land off someone
else.
And so the human
beings get caught
in the conflicts
of these Elohim,
who are all jostling
up against each other
because they're
wanting resources.
They're wanting hegemony.
And we are their foot soldiers.
And so we've grown
up with this mindset
that we are here to serve
the higher ups and all
the arguments and
conflicts they have.
It gets even worse,
though, when we
translate that community
of warring individuals
and morph it into
a single entity.
>> REGINA: Yes, the only
God, the God Almighty.
>> WALLIS: Yeah, and so then
how do you explain the violence?
Then how do you explain
the lack of empathy?
>> REGINA: The brutality.
>> WALLIS: The brutality, yes.
>> REGINA: OK, so
this is something--
I'll just ask you at this
point before we go any further.
So as a person of substance in
the church, how in the world
did you ever explain
that to a congregation?
And I asked because by five,
I knew something was wrong.
I thought, no, if
there's a God, they
don't kill people, ask people
to give up their firstborn.
They would never be mean.
>> WALLIS: Exactly.
And children do pick that up.
Children will ask
these questions.
Why has God changed his mind
and decided to genocide everyone
with a flood?
Why is God punishing
70,000 innocent people?
That's not right, is it?
Children pick this up.
They know there's something off.
And, well, preachers do as well.
But--
>> REGINA: How do they
keep the story going then?
I mean, how did you feel
personally when you--
>> WALLIS: When I came
against these texts?
Yes.
I, like a child, instinctively
knew these could not
be accurate stories about God.
And there was a
church father way back
in the beginning
of Christianity who
was considered to be the
father of hermeneutics.
And he came up with
a little schematic
to help preachers
with this problem.
And he was saying, if you
take the Elohim and Yahweh
stories at face value
as God's stories,
you'll have to believe
of God such things
as we would not believe of the
most savage and unjust of men.
So what do you do with it?
You look for another
layer of meaning.
You go for the
moral of the story.
And if the moral of
the story is appalling,
you look for another meaning.
Is there a prophetic meaning?
Is it a metaphor
of something else?
So he's given this
helpful preacher's guide,
which is great if all you want
to do is produce a sermon.
And, therefore,
brothers and sisters
if that's what you're
looking for, fine.
But if you're wanting
to understand the text,
you're going to have
to go back to it
and ask some deeper questions.
And the problem is that
most pastors are just as
overscheduled as everyone else.
They'll come across the text.
They'll find a way to
preach around it and think,
I'm going to have
to get back to that
and work out what's
really going on there.
And then they never
do get back to it.
And it was really only
because I was invalided out
for a while with an
ultimate Frisbee injury
that I had the opportunity to
go back to some of these texts
and think, well, what
really is happening there?
If it's not a God story,
what is it a story about?
What was it our ancestors
wanted to know here?
>> REGINA: And so by allowing
that story to stand--
others, not yourself-- by
allowing that story to stand,
it is essentially
justified colonization
of every kind from virtually
the beginning of modern history.
>> WALLIS: That is the problem.
That's exactly the problem.
If we read these stories of
colonization and violence--
and all colonization
is violent--
but interpret it as a God story,
it distorts our image of God.
So instead of God being a
beautiful idea, the source
of the cosmos and everything
in it, that in which
we all live and move and have
our being, all of a sudden,
we've got this violent
entity who can be brutal,
can't be reasoned with,
is actually unforgiving,
and does things
that really can't
be justified morally,
except if he's God,
you have to justify it.
So if God is xenophobic, you
have to justify xenophobia.
If God thinks in terms
of the human race divided
into my people
and not my people,
you have to start
thinking in the same way.
And, Regina, you're
absolutely right.
You can draw a
straight line from that
to all the conquests
we've made, invading
each other's countries,
enslaving other people groups,
all kinds of misogyny
and injustice
done in the name of God
because that's how God behaves,
isn't it?
And so--
>> REGINA: What a perfect point
to bring up because most people
think, how could this be
done in the name of God?
But you just explained it.
If you're looking
at the God the way
I was taught about God in Sunday
school, I found it terrifying.
I hated those stories
and murder and blood
running down the
streets and locusts
and giving up your first born.
And--
>> WALLIS: Well, that's right.
And the moment
you allow yourself
to consider the possibility
it's not a God story,
the moral evaluations
are obvious.
A genocide is a genocide.
A brutalization is
a brutalization.
And I remember my
daughter coming home
from school one day.
And they were going to a
Christian school in Canberra,
Australia, at the time.
And they'd done a
Bible study in class.
Now, I think Evie was
10 when this happened.
And they'd studied a text
where God had just slaughtered
another bunch of people.
And the students were asking,
isn't a God a God of love?
Why would he do that?
And the teacher gave his answer.
And my daughter Evie
said, I wasn't really
convinced by what he said.
And I said, well, did
you ask a question, Evie?
And she said, yes, I put
up my hand, and I said,
would God do that?
How could you justify
that in the name of love?
And I said, what
did the teacher say?
And she said, well,
he gave an answer.
But I'm not sure he really
believed what he was saying.
So we all have that instinct.
Children have it.
But the translations have
kind of bullied believers
into not asking the questions,
because you can't question God.
>> REGINA: So we're
talking about, certainly,
most of the developed world for
sure in terms of the religions
and some of the other
cultures that have come up
socioeconomically behind.
Nonetheless, all the
Judeo-Christian religions,
the Muslim faith, all under
these brutal gods, although I
don't really know enough about
the Muslim texts and the Quran
to know how that piece
fits into that story.
But let's talk about--
because what this has done
has given the entirety
of all of those cultures
an innate sense
of low self-esteem
just to be born human.
>> WALLIS: Yes, you are made
to feel guilty for having been
born.
So this whole doctrine
of original sin,
which is a total distortion
of what's in the Bible,
means that you don't have to do
anything wrong in order for you
to have to feel ashamed of
yourself, and not only that,
but to believe that your whole
purpose is to serve the higher
ups, serve God ultimately.
But it becomes something
that's very easy to manipulate.
So we have churches where
people can be manipulated.
And we have whole
societies where
we're wired to serve somebody
better than ourselves.
I mean, my gran, she grew up--
she was a Downton Abbey era
person.
And she began her life
in service working
in one of those great houses.
And I remember seeing a
documentary about that period.
They were interviewing
servants about the families
they had served.
And there was this big house.
Five people lived in the house,
and 50 servants served them.
And that was seen as
normal, acceptable.
They interviewed some of
these servants years later.
They were in their 70s and 80s.
And the interviewer
said, you talk
as if the five in the
family were better than you.
Oh, well, they were, they said.
I thought, better
in what respect?
Better morally.
Were they more intelligent?
It was just this wiring
that we are all here
to serve someone more
powerful, wealthier,
more important than ourselves.
And it goes back to
this worldview of a God
who demands obedience
and service and us
all tiptoeing around.
But it's a distortion.
And I love going to the root
meanings of the key words
and realizing that
the stories are really
about something else.
They're really about how
unacceptable that is.
They're really about finding
our power as individuals
and discovering each other and
discovering our people power.
And there are inspiring
moments of people power
in the Bible, all
of which disappear
the moment you start translating
Yahweh and El Shaddai as God.
>> REGINA: Let's talk about
the people power that was
originally there that
has gone missing.
>> WALLIS: There's a powerful
moment in 1 Samuel 8.
And it's a moment in
which the tribes of Israel
have just got fed up of that
scenario I was just describing.
They don't want to
serve Yahweh anymore.
He's had enough, virgin girls,
gold, beef, and lamb off them.
And they don't
want to be governed
by someone who doesn't have
any fellow feeling with them
any longer.
And so the leaders of
the tribes come together,
and they confront
Yahweh's deputy.
And they say, it's enough.
We're not going to
serve Yahweh anymore.
We're going to have a human
leader for human society.
And in that moment, Yahweh
knows he's lost his power.
Up until that point, he's
governed through terror,
through violence.
And now he has a bunch of
people who have clearly
made a decision which amounted
to, what can he do, kill us?
And they've reached the
point where that attitude
has transmuted into courage.
They're acting together.
They're speaking with one voice.
And when Yahweh sees that,
he realizes he has to go.
And so he goes.
He's replaced with
human kings and queens,
but the story goes on.
And the lesson in the story is
the persistence of old powers
because Yahweh might not
be their king anymore.
But he's still defining
their foreign policy.
He's still telling
the kings and queens
what they can and can't do.
If public policy departs
too far from what he wants,
he hoicks it back
to what he wants.
And this resonates with me
having grown up in Britain,
because in Britain,
for 800 years,
we've been trying to
get rid of crown power.
We've been trying to
become a democracy.
And after 800 years
of major changes,
revolutions, Magna Carta,
getting rid of the monarchy,
redefining the monarchy, we've
had all the social movements,
the labor movements, two
world wars, a Reformation,
even now, our democratically
elected prime minister
can't go more than
a week before having
to report to the crown what
he or she has been up to.
Nothing can become law
unless the senior member
of the Windsor family says, OK.
We now know that her late
Majesty Queen Elizabeth
II blocked about 160
pieces of legislation
until she'd got
exemptions from them.
And they were laws to do
with workers' rights, animal
welfare.
There was a law introduced
in the '60s saying
it's illegal to
discriminate against people
in the workplace on the
basis of their ethnicity.
Or the queen wouldn't
have any of that,
had to get an exemption
before that could become law.
So don't tell me that's
ceremonial power.
That's crown power
that is persisting.
>> REGINA: But I've
seen Instagram,
William and Kate are
going to change it all
because they're hip
when it's their turn.
>> WALLIS: We'll see.
>> REGINA: I don't think so.
>> WALLIS: But the Yahweh
story is almost like a template
for that, where they
get rid of Yahweh.
But he becomes the hidden
hand in geopolitics.
Nevertheless, there is
that exciting moment
when the people come
together, and they
make a huge change in human
history, human leaders
for human society.
And that's another lesson
that disappears when you
translate it as a God story.
If Yahweh is God, then
they've all been very naughty.
And they should only
expect all the trouble
that's going to come
their way afterwards.
If Yahweh is something
else, then it's
a story of people power.
And I argue in "The
Eden Conspiracy"
that whole story
is a dragon story.
>> REGINA: Yes, we're
getting into that.
That kind of shocked
me, actually,
because I hadn't heard
that spin before.
I hadn't even heard that,
never about that translation.
So let's just go
to one point here.
You're talking about
the destroyer, Yahweh
as the destroyer, actually.
One of his messages, I
will murder you horribly
because you've displeased me.
Nobody will be able to
protect you from me.
I will get you.
I will smite you, and
then I save you, but only
if you worship me.
Oh, my god.
>> WALLIS: Yeah, would you
worship someone who says
something like that?
No.
But anyone who's been
in a relationship
with an abusive partner
recognizes that psychology.
>> REGINA: Oh, exactly.
Exactly.
>> WALLIS: Nobody loves you.
Only I love you.
>> REGINA: That's right.
>> WALLIS: But only
if you please me.
And if you don't, no one
can protect you from me.
It is a psychotic
way of thinking.
So it tells you something
about the individual Yahweh.
But it's also the
language of colonization.
That is what any colonizer says.
So when the British
start talking
to the leaders of what was
to become Ghana in the 1800s,
they were basically
saying, look,
there are some major
world powers here.
Do you want us on your
side or against you?
We've got a great fleet here.
Have you noticed our armies?
So do you want us helping you?
Oh, yes, please.
And, of course, once
the yes, please, comes,
you find out the colonizers
are there for their benefit,
not for yours.
And so, really, it's
that same logic.
We'll protect you, but no
one can protect you from us.
>> REGINA: And that's not so
different in our institutions
and within our
political systems.
>> WALLIS: Yes.
>> REGINA: They're still
reflecting that today.
Oh, we're looking out
for you, or your agencies
are looking out for you.
Everything above you that you
should simply not question.
And, honestly, most
of humanity does not
question these systems.
>> WALLIS: That's very true.
And what's interesting is that
you've got the memory of people
stretching back hundreds and
thousands of years who've
had these experiences,
who've had to work out,
how do we live in a world
that operates this way?
How do we thrive
in a world where
these abusive powers exist?
And how do we come together
to avoid being manipulated
and being told what's what?
And those are the
stories I want to recover
from the biblical narrative.
>> REGINA: And these beings
that you're talking about,
even this sect of beings are
thought to or known to live
many thousands of years and can
extend their power throughout
our history.
And it appears they have.
So let's go now to some of
the interpretations you found
getting into the
dragon story because I
found that's fascinating.
>> WALLIS: Well, just to follow
on from what you were saying,
that answer that that
young man was given,
that really is what the
Bible is telling us.
There is this group
called the El Ba' Adat,
the council of powers.
Our ancestors wanted us to
know that you can't understand
why this world works
the way it does
until you realize
there's a nonhuman
layer to our governance.
And I was amazed to find that
in the work of Robert Kirk
in the 1600s, who was--
I mean, that's a very
conservative period
we're looking at, especially for
a Presbyterian minister, which
he was in Aberfoyle, Scotland.
And just through listening
to the grassroots memory
of the people there, he came
to exactly this conclusion.
He wrote the book "The
Secret Commonwealth"
saying that we have
visible government.
Then we have covert
government, then the elites
that run the covert
government, and then
the nonhuman layer that
tells the elites what's what.
And so it's an
ancient story that
says there's this nonhuman
layer defining what
happens on planet Earth.
So I just wanted to
pick up on that first.
>> REGINA: OK, so now let's
go back to what we're talking
about a moment ago, the notion
of a dragon being associated
with the gods or being the gods.
>> WALLIS: Well, there are
lots of dragons in the Bible,
which is--
>> REGINA: They didn't teach
me that in Sunday school.
>> WALLIS: No, probably,
it got mentioned.
But then we take it as metaphor.
So we've got
physical descriptions
of Yahweh that talk about
the thickness of his hide,
the length of his tail,
the length of his snout,
the fire that comes from his
snout, his flight feathers.
And people read this
and think, well,
that must just be a
metaphor of his power.
But then there are
other texts where
Yahweh is comparing
himself with other beasts,
with other animals
and saying that he's
stronger than these
other animals, which
is a very strange
thing to say if you are
God, the source of the cosmos.
So it's something else.
And then the shape
of the story tells us
it's a dragon story because
almost all dragon stories
around the world have
this shape, that we begin
with human beings being governed
over by nonhuman entities who
have no fellow feeling.
They're cold blooded.
They're draconian.
And then they use terror so
much that it loses its power.
And we saw this in Romania.
We saw this in the
Philippines, where
the people reached
that point of saying,
we're not going to
do this anymore.
What are they going to do?
They can only kill us.
And when the people
come together and say,
no more beef, lamb, virgin
girls, gold for you, the dragon
usually slinks away
off into the mountains.
And we move into a
new period of history,
where we do have human
governance for human society.
The Yahweh story follows
that exact same shape
that I mentioned
earlier in 1 Samuel 8.
And more than that,
his name tells us
that the story fits in the
world's canon of dragon
narratives because
so many of them
have this same phonetic pattern.
So if you listen to the names of
the Coca in Portugal and Spain,
the Colchis in Georgia,
Akhekh in Egypt, Kukulkan,
Q'uq'umatz, Quetzalcoatl,
[NON-ENGLISH],,
They've all got this
"kh, kh" in them.
And you might say that's
very interesting, Paul.
But what does that
have to do with Yahweh?
Well, Yahweh doesn't sound like
it's got the "kh, kh" in it
until you look at those two hs.
And you realize that
they're almost silent now.
But because of the
pattern of sound softening
that happens in the
development of language,
you go back to
proto-northwest Semitic,
the ancestor of Hebrew, and
you pronounce hh, "kh kh."
It's the same sound.
And Hebrew scholars
have been mystified
by that name for a
long time because it's
got no etymology in
the Hebrew language.
It's got no meaning.
It appears from nowhere.
So we could see
it as a loan word.
But I argue in "The Eden
Conspiracy" it's actually
a sequence of sounds.
And it puts me in
mind of Doctor Who,
just to jump into
fiction for a moment
because I used to love
Doctor Who as a child.
And you knew that
monster was lurking
in that dark corridor because
you could hear it breathing
"kh, kh" as it came.
And I wonder if all
around the world,
we've got that sound associated
with these draconian entities
because we remember
how they sounded,
the noise they made
as they approached.
And, again, the Yahweh
stories fit precisely
into that template.
But the purpose of
the stories is not
to make us scared of dragons.
It's to make us remember the
power of the people when they
come together and say, we're
going to work with each other
and create a new society.
>> REGINA: So you have this
information, more or less,
if you know how to read it
hiding in plain sight that we
are being controlled
from beyond,
that we've been colonized.
Entities have come here
and colonized this planet.
They've been here for thousands
and thousands and thousands
of years.
In your own understanding-- and
I'm asking you to take a leap--
what are they getting
out of this relationship?
And are they aware that we are
starting to change as a species
and beginning to wake up?
>> WALLIS: Well, my reading is
there's always been a diversity
of ET races intersecting
with human history.
So we've got lots of
stories of colonization.
And sometimes it's very obvious.
You know you've been
colonized because they've
turned up with weaponry
and just taken over.
Sometimes, going back to Robert
Kirk, it can be more subtle.
And you will just notice shifts
in the culture telling you
someone else has
just taken over.
But we have memory of other
beings coming and nurturing
us and helping us.
So lots of the Pleiadian stories
have this kind of character
to them.
If you're listening to
Native American story,
an Aboriginal Australian
story, there's
the Pleiadian
connection, people coming
to help humanity progress,
to learn how to farm,
to learn how to
become a civilization.
The Yolngu people in the
Northern Territory in Australia
have this beautiful story of
the Mimi, who in their dance
told the people how to
hunt and how to fish
and which plants were good for
food, which were good to avoid,
which were good for medicine.
So there are all these
positive interventions as well.
And there comes a very
interesting moment
in the story of the
Bible where the kings
are deciding whether
they're going
to allow that positive
memory to remain,
or if they want
to get rid of that
and just keep the Yahweh
character because it gives them
a neat pyramid of powers with
a violent God at the top,
the king just under.
And then the people--
>> REGINA: Everyone
subservient to the king.
>> WALLIS: Subservient
to the king.
That's right.
So primitive Judaism had this
diverse memory of contact.
And then it got pared
down to something
the kings thought
was more manageable.
>> REGINA: That was Josiah.
Was that under Josiah?
>> WALLIS: Yes, it
was under Josiah.
It started under his
grandfather, King Hezekiah.
So this period is the eighth
to the sixth century BCE.
Hezekiah is a king
who is a Yahwist.
He lives in Jerusalem,
and the Jerusalem temple
is a Yahwist temple.
And he thinks to himself,
why should my people not
worship my God?
I worship Yahweh.
Everyone should worship Yahweh.
And his Yahwist high
priest Hilkiah says,
that's a very good idea, sire.
And so they begin this process
of ritual reform, where
they start shutting down all the
other temples and priesthoods.
So the one devoted
to Asherah, that's
a positive memory of nurture
in the past, get rid of that.
The ones devoted to
Chemosh, get rid of that.
Anything else, Dagon,
Baal, get rid of it all.
We'll knock down the temples,
demolish the standing stones
that mark the places
where our ancestors met
these advanced beings, break the
heads off the dolls of Asherah
so no one can remember
what she looks like,
deface the carvings of the
whole tsva ha-shamayim,
the sky armies that are
in the Jerusalem temple,
because we don't want
people remembering.
We want them to think
there's only one God,
and his name is Yahweh,
one king, one high priest,
one temple in Jerusalem.
All the tithes can
come here now instead
of to all these other temples.
And so it was a
bit of a power grab
and a power grab for the
high priesthood who were now
the only agency of truth,
the only news agency telling
everyone what's what
and what to believe.
So it was a huge exercise
of narrative control.
So Hilkiah and Hezekiah
start the process.
And then Josiah continues it.
He becomes king when he's
eight, if you can imagine
what that would be like.
That happened in Britain.
We had a nine-year-old
become king, King Edward.
And two powerful families said,
don't worry, we'll help him.
That's the Dudleys
and the Seymours.
And they step forward,
we'll help you, sire.
Don't worry.
Oh, thank you so
much, grandfathers.
Thank you so much, Uncle Dudley.
And they leveraged
their position
to push forward
religious reforms,
exactly the same thing
happened to Josiah
when he was eight years old.
He became king.
Hilkiah, from time to time,
would sidle up to him,
I imagine, and say, sire,
I've identified another threat
to your authority
over the kingdom.
Would you like me
to take care of it?
Oh, Hilkiah, what
would I do without you?
And every yes is the
demolition of another temple.
Sometimes it's the slaughtering
of another priesthood
until you've got one God, one
king, one high priest, one
temple in Jerusalem, one neatly
ordered theocratic society
that's very easy to run.
And that whole story has
told us-- it's not a secret.
We are told that story in
Jeremiah and Second Kings.
>> REGINA: How did it stick
to have the staying power,
that narrative to continue to
this very day and be exported
all over the world, and people
still operating under it?
How did it get that
kind of staying power?
>> WALLIS: Two things happened.
Within Judaism, there
was a final redaction
of what we now call
the Old Testament,
the Hebrew scriptures.
And the narration is
kind of interesting
because all that
information is still there.
The memory of Asherah
is still there.
The memory of Chemosh and
Dagon, it's all still there.
But what the narrator
has done in order
to please his Yahwist
boss is layer an opinion
over the top of it.
So when the narrator
says, the people
loved Asherah and commemorated
her on every high hill
and under every green tree and
they rejected Yahweh and spoke
very disrespectfully
of him, the narrator
has just told us how it was.
But then the narrator
says, isn't that awful?
Isn't that idolatrous?
And the moment he
says that, we feel we
have to agree with the opinion.
But once you separate the
opinion from the information,
you realize he's just
told us Judaism used
to be all about paleocontact.
But you get to the
final redaction.
That's what you have to believe.
And then that is what got glued
on to the apostolic writings
to create the Bible
for Christianity.
And that was a great shame,
because in the beginning,
there were church fathers, like
Origen, who I mentioned before,
must come to his defense now
having said what I said before
about his preaching hack.
We've got Origen, Clement of
Alexandria, Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, and Marcion
all saying those stories
of Elohim and Yahweh
are not God's stories.
So we're not going to
build Christianity on that.
You've got the apostolic
leaders in Acts 15
saying we're not going to build
Christianity on the Hebrew
scriptures.
All that's there
looks like it's going
to go in a good direction.
We're just going to go with
the teachings of Jesus here.
And anyone who was
versed in Plato
was more than ready
for Jesus's teaching
because he carried on where
Plato left off, except votes
went the wrong way.
And the decision
was made to glue
that last redaction
of the Hebrew
scriptures onto the
apostolic writings,
creating the
impression that the God
of that redaction, the violent
Yahweh, was the God of Jesus.
And so Christians
have been entrained
to believe it's a
story of continuity
that Jesus is a Yahwist.
And he's putting us under the
power of Yahweh once again.
And it's not true.
It's a story of discontinuity.
Jesus distanced himself from
Yahweh in a number of ways.
It's there in the Gospel.
But because of this book,
because of these votes,
because of 2,000 years
of teaching tradition,
Christians believe they have
to defend the violent God
of the Old Testament.
And so it's distorted
Christian history.
>> REGINA: That's right.
>> WALLIS: That's why
Christian societies have done
the invading and
colonizing and enslaving.
And I'm arguing we need to
go back to those decisions
and make fresh decisions
and see the New Testament
in its own light.
And Jesus is teaching
And I believe his teachings
are empowering, again,
not just in terms of
political people power,
but in terms of
ascension and discovering
the real powers of human
being and what they might be.
>> REGINA: Well, the
great virtues alone,
which are archetypes
in themselves,
of care and compassion and
truth and love and beauty,
it's all embedded in that.
That's what we're all trying
to awaken to and throw off
the chains that have bound
us for thousands of years
in this guilt tripping
thought and hierarchy, all
the way through our family
systems and everything.
So I have a question.
Now, this is random.
And so if it's not
at all relevant,
just toss this one
out, and we'll move on.
So when you're talking
about overthrowing
this very rich and
diverse belief system
and casts of characters in the
early mystical Christian era,
I'm thinking about what happened
in the 18th dynasty in Egypt
when they came in
and said, look,
we're no longer honoring
the various gods,
animal-headed gods, that we're
going directly to the sun now.
We're going to the cosmos
and the sun itself,
and you have access.
You don't need intermediaries.
And, of course,
they were heretics.
That was Akhenaten
and Nefertiti.
They were heretics
and, I think, obviously
had very difficult times
as a result of that.
It's been attempted,
at the time,
to destroy any evidence
they even existed.
But how does that--
which was also a narrowing
down of beliefs because people
believed in their kitchen
god and their grain god
and so forth?
Do those align at all?
>> WALLIS: Well, it's almost
a counterpart story because I
think Akhenaten was offering
something very positive--
>> REGINA: I do too.
>> WALLIS: --with this
monotheistic view.
Politically, obviously,
it was a problem
because it was disempowering
all these other priesthoods.
>> REGINA: Who made
their living that way.
>> WALLIS: Exactly.
So it was a big deal.
And there was trouble
because of it.
So it's kind of a
counterpart story.
There is power and beauty
in the idea of monotheism
because it is teaching us not
to bow down to other powers,
not to give our power
away to powerful figures
and to give the
redactors their credit.
When that rewrite of the
Old Testament was done,
that was part of the message
they wished to convey.
There's only one God and
source of the cosmos.
That's a very positive message.
But, unfortunately, they used
the name of Yahweh for that God
and then pasted it
over the earlier texts
so that monotheism
became muddied
with all these other things.
And I find sometimes
even the word
God is very difficult
for people to do business
with because, immediately,
all the ideas of obedience,
punishment, fear will
click into place.
And I think one of
the great insights
that Jesus came with is that
if you can transcend fear,
you can have an amazing life.
There's a wonderful summary of
his teaching at the beginning
of Matthew's gospel.
And I'll cut to the chase
and go to the root meanings.
No, I tell you the
translation first
because it's kind of funny.
The familiar
translation is repent
for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand.
Now, that sounds like a warning.
Repent means clean your life up
because God's about to show up,
and you wouldn't want to get
on the wrong side of him.
>> REGINA: You're
about to be judged.
>> WALLIS: You're
And we hear it that way because
of 2,000 years of angry God
teaching.
Go to the root meanings.
What he's actually saying
is go beyond the mind
because the powers and
principles of the cosmos
are available to you.
Now, could there be
any greater invitation
to explore what's
possible than that?
And then when he adds to
that, the power and principles
of the cosmos are within
you, that's even better.
And he's saying if you look
deeply within yourself,
you'll find the cosmos.
Look deeply into the universe.
You'll find yourself.
Now, it's not just being
elevated by a better
ethical way of thinking.
It's, oh my goodness,
what is possible for us?
And many ancient
traditions of wisdom
point to our ability to ascend,
to become more conscious, more
intelligent, to access
higher cognitive powers.
We watch Jesus do it
all through the gospels.
And then he turns around and
says, and you can do this too.
And I find that rather exciting.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
So I think people listening to
this, many who take exception
to the word God, obviously,
because of the way
it's been used really in
a tyrannical way almost
in their lives, to be able
to change that reflection out
to the creative source of all.
>> WALLIS: Yes.
>> REGINA: The
creative source of all.
>> WALLIS: That's right.
My wife, Ruth, doesn't
use the word God.
She talks about
divine intelligence.
>> REGINA: Yes,
And if all of that is reflected
in us, and we're part of that.
I deal with a lot of
different authors who
talk about not just
paleocontact, but modern day
contact and all the various
species who have come,
who have visited, who have
left information for us.
And it seems, indeed, that there
are many benevolent others,
interdimensionally and
otherwise, who are here
to help us remember that.
>> WALLIS: Here to help.
>> REGINA: It's just
such a persistent story.
We give our power away
to everyone, our dentist,
our doctor, our
priest, or everybody.
>> WALLIS: Yes, that's right.
It's empowering to know
that each one of us
has an invisible team
of helpers around us.
And you'll be told that if
you go to southern Africa,
a sangoma or a n'anga.
A traditional healer
will tell you that.
It's actually there in
the New Testament as well.
In Hebrews 12, it speaks
about ancestral spirits
very interested in
us running our race.
They're interested
in our progress.
They want to see what
we do with their DNA.
And they want us to succeed.
1 John 4, we can expect
helpers to come along.
The writer says, spirits,
but he never quite
defines who they are
or what they are.
And what fascinates me
about that verse is he says,
don't believe every spirit.
Test them.
But you're going to get
some good information
if you're willing to do that.
What's exciting about
that is, first of all,
we should all expect
contact experiences.
And second of all, we should
all keep our sovereignty.
I need to weigh up, do
I think that's right?
Is that helpful?
Do I need to act on that or not?
And that was part of
primitive Christianity.
It's a very empowering way of
engaging where you expect help.
But you expect to be
a sovereign being.
It's there.
It never gets preached on.
It gets brushed aside.
But it's a little vestige of
what primitive Christianity
really was.
>> REGINA: And where we're
headed because the gig is about
up for the other forces.
It's not just the people
of the Philippines
and elsewhere that have
turned against the notion
of enslavement to a
God giving up their--
whether it's lamb and beef
and virgins and gold or what.
I think, in general,
the world is getting
kind of tired of that story.
>> WALLIS: I think so.
I think we're waking up to
the dark side of history
and saying, no more of that.
Thank you very much.
But more and more people are
waking up to their helpers
as well.
I do a lot of
coaching with people.
And, often, I'll
say, do you know
I'm coming to believe
that each one of us
has a little invisible
team of helpers?
And I've yet to find a
client who doesn't say,
I'm coming to believe that too.
But they weren't taught
it in church or at school.
They're discovering it
through their experience
and through their
intuition firing
off better than it
has in the past.
>> REGINA: Right.
But if you speak this publicly
among family, friends,
work colleagues,
and so forth, you're
considered a bit of a wing
nut, new ager, or whatnot.
And so that has to start.
I mean, it's getting better.
People are starting to see
that there's some truth.
I'm that person in my family.
But some of the things I
tell them have come to pass.
And now they don't make
fun of me so much anymore.
>> WALLIS: Oh, good for you.
>> REGINA: And it's true.
And in that sense, when people
say, oh, I'm just so alone,
I think, how can
you feel alone when
you're surrounded by all of
this that you can engage with,
talk to?
They're there to help
you every minute.
>> WALLIS: Sometimes I think
people just need a little
nudge.
And if you ask
them, have you ever
felt that you had a
little bit of assistance,
surprising coincidences, a
thought that came to you,
everyone has these experiences.
You just need to shine
a little light on them.
>> REGINA: I agree.
We're out of time.
Any final thoughts before we go?
Thank you so much.
I just love the
way you lay it out.
You're so articulate.
And thank you for doing the hard
work, the academic work for us.
>> WALLIS: Well, thank you.
Well, my final
thought is something
that I take from the
Gnostic writings, which
is to do with archons, which
feed off negative emotion.
And they manipulate us and
push us into dark spaces.
And my insight from
that is we need
to be very intentional
about our emotional state
and our mental state.
We need to look out
for one another.
And if your friend
is going into a funk
or if you're going into a
funk, don't let that happen.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> WALLIS: Before
you get out of bed,
before you step
out the front door,
decide what energy you're going
to put into your interactions.
And if you're
intentional about it,
you'll put forward
a positive energy.
And it will be reflected back.
And you'll have a better day,
and so will everyone around you
so.
That's an insight I love that
the early Christians had.
>> REGINA: I totally
agree with you.
And you're not feeding
the beast anymore.
>> WALLIS: Exactly.
>> REGINA: Paul,
thank you so much.
I hope to see you here on
this side again one day.
>> WALLIS: Thanks, Regina.
It's been a pleasure.
>> REGINA: I hope you found
this conversation enlightening,
even if it's a bit challenging.
If you were raised in the
church or in a synagogue,
we will not stop digging until
we can strip bare and see
the face of what distorts and
contracts our reality on Earth,
as Paul has laid out.
To learn more about
Paul's books and work,
you can go to
paulanthonywallis.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]